reading.md, before:

## CryptoArt and NFT reading list


### CryptoArt / NFTs

Bailey, J. (2017) ‘The Blockchain Art Market is Here’, Artnome, 27 December. Available at: https://www.artnome.com/news/2017/12/22/the-blockchain-art-market-is-here.

Catlow, R. et al. (eds) (2017) Artists re:thinking the blockchain. London: Torque Editions and Furtherfield.

Lovink, G., Vries, P. de and Gloerich, I. (eds) (2019) Moneylab Report: Outside of Finance. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures (INC Reader, 10).

Myers, R. (2019) ‘Three Times Three Modes of Blockchain Art’, Essays, 8 May. Available at: https://rhea.art/three-times-three-modes-of-blockchain-art.

Ostachowski, M.L. (2021) History of Crypto Art. Available at: https://mlo.art/research/history-of-crypto-art/.

Weidinger, A. et al. (eds) (2021) Proof of art: a short history of NFTs, from the beginning of digital art to the metaverse. Berlin: DISTANZ Verlag.

### Hic et Nunc / Teia

Bailey, J. (2021) ‘Hic Et Nunc Brings True Spirit Of Web Art To The Here And Now’, Artnome, 21 March. Available at: https://www.artnome.com/news/2021/3/21/hic-et-nunc-revives-the-true-spirit-of-web-art-through-nfts.

Doe, J. (2022) ‘Hicetnunc screenshots’, Notion, 25 January. Available at: https://hot-flea-a19.notion.site/Hicetnunc-screenshots-8ed49e2ff175413d835600d0dd739ebf.

Drubay, D. (2021) ‘How hic et nunc Brings a New Paradigm Shift in the NFTs and Art Spaces’, Medium, 29 October. Available at: https://dianedrubay.medium.com/how-hic-et-nunc-brings-a-new-paradigm-shift-in-the-blockchain-and-art-spaces-916b34644ce.

Evans, C.L. (2021) ‘Inside Brazil’s DIY, eco-friendly NFT art marketplace’, Rest of World, 17 May. Available at: https://restofworld.org/2021/inside-brazils-diy-nft-art-marketplace/.

Lima, R. (2021) ‘OBJKT Swap’, Medium, 1 March. Available at: https://hicetnunc2000.medium.com/objkt-swap-62dbaf776336.

Mumu the Stan, Koshino, T. and P1xelfool (2021) ‘Building a Global NFT Movement’. Available at: https://tezos.com/events/art-basel/.

Plummer-Fernández, M. (2021) ‘Not another JPEG’, 9 April. Available at: https://www.plummerfernandez.com/works/not-another-jpeg/.

Straeubig, M. (2022) ‘A brief timeline of Hic et Nunc (H=N)’, GitHub. Available at: https://github.com/i3games/hen-timeline.

Teia Community (2022) ‘Teia.art Launch Announcement’, Teia Community Updates & Resources, 1 February. Available at: https://hencommunity.quest/blog/teia-art-launch-announcement.

### Art System / Art Market

Luhmann, N. (2000) Art as a social system. Stanford University Press.

Taylor, G.D. (2014) When the Machine Made Art: The Troubled History of Computer Art. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.

Thompson, D. (2010) The 12 Million Dollar Stuffed Shark: The Curious Economics of Contemporary Art. London: Aurum Press.

Warburton, N. (2003) The Art Question. London; New York: Routledge.

Wilcox, J. (1953) ‘The Beginnings of l’Art Pour l’Art’, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 11(4), p. 360. doi:10.2307/426457.

### Economy / Gouvernance / Legal 

DisCO.coop (2019) If I Only had a Heart: A DisCO Manifesto. DisCO.coop, Transnational Institute and Guerrilla Media Collective.

Kerr, D. and Jennings, M. (2022) A Legal Framework for Decentralized Autonomous Organizations.

### Environmental Impact of Crypto / NFTs

Koomey, J. (2019) Estimating Bitcoin Electricity Use: A Beginner’s Guide. Coin Center. Available at: https://www.coincenter.org/estimating-bitcoin-electricity-use-a-beginners-guide/.

Lemercier, J. (2021) ‘The problem of (Ethereum) CryptoArt’, 17 February. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/the-problem-of-cryptoart/.

Lemercier, J. (2021) ‘The Carbon Drop’, Studio Joanie Lemercier, 22 March. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/the-carbon-drop/.

McDonald, K. (2021) ‘Ethereum Emissions: A Bottom-up Estimate’, arXiv:2112.01238 [cs, math] [Preprint]. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01238.

Platt, M. et al. (2021) Energy Footprint of Blockchain Consensus Mechanisms Beyond Proof-of-Work. 7. UCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies. Available at: http://blockchain.cs.ucl.ac.uk/discussion-papers/.

PricewaterhouseCoopers Advisory (2021) Study of the environmental impact of the Tezos blockchain - Life Cycle Assessment of the Tezos blockchain protocol. Available at: https://tezos.com/2021-12-06-Tezos-LCA-Final.pdf.

### Technological Background

Buterin, V. (2013) ‘Ethereum Whitepaper’. Available at: https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.

crcdng (2022) Resources for Developers - Hic et Nunc / Teia / Tezos. Available at: https://github.com/i3games/hen-dev-resources.

Cryptopedia Staff (2022) ‘What Is Proof of Stake (PoS)? PoS Types Examined’, Cryptopedia, 20 January. Available at: https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/proof-of-stake-delegated-proof-of-stake-consensus-mechanism.

Entriken, W. et al. (2022) Ethereum Improvement Proposal 721. Available at: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/0fd7ed124cc248b4d3ec62d6202b3a249a7bfe90/EIPS/eip-721.md.

Goodman, L.M. (2014) Tezos — a self-amending crypto-ledger. White paper.

Mishura, E. and Mondet, S. (2020) FA2 - Multi-Asset Interface. TZIP-12. Available at: https://gitlab.com/tezos/tzip/-/blob/master/proposals/tzip-12/tzip-12.md .

Nakamoto, S. (2008) Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Available at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.

Radomski, W. et al. (2022) Ethereum Improvement Proposal 1155. Available at: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/0fd7ed124cc248b4d3ec62d6202b3a249a7bfe90/EIPS/eip-1155.md.

Van Hijfte, S. (2020) Blockchain Platforms: A Look at the Underbelly of Distributed Platforms. Morgan and Claypool.

### Commentary 

Alice, R. et al. (2022) ‘Can we Build a Better NFT Ecosystem?’ Available at: https://www.rightclicksave.com/article/can-we-build-a-better-nft-ecosystem.

Jisu (2021) ‘Debunking EVERYTHING about The Technology & Ecological-Impact of NFTs/CryptoArt’, Medium, 8 May. Available at: https://jisuartist.medium.com/debunking-everything-about-the-technology-ecological-impact-of-nfts-cryptoart-60ee09bd00ed.

Lemercier, J. (2022) ‘Null and void.’, Studio Joanie Lemercier, 8 January. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/null-and-void/.

OSINACHI (2022) ‘Have NFTs Lost Their Way?’ Available at: https://www.rightclicksave.com/article/have-nfts-lost-their-way.

The Blockchain Socialist (2021) ‘The best leftist hot take on NFTs you’ll ever listen to (Remix)’, 2 May. Available at: https://theblockchainsocialist.com/unlocked-the-best-leftist-hot-take-on-nfts-youll-ever-listen-to-remix/.

-----------------------

License: CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)

Commit message:

separate governance and art market legal / ethical

reading.md, after:

## CryptoArt and NFT reading list


### CryptoArt / NFTs

Bailey, J. (2017) ‘The Blockchain Art Market is Here’, Artnome, 27 December. Available at: https://www.artnome.com/news/2017/12/22/the-blockchain-art-market-is-here.

Catlow, R. et al. (eds) (2017) Artists re:thinking the blockchain. London: Torque Editions and Furtherfield.

Lovink, G., Vries, P. de and Gloerich, I. (eds) (2019) Moneylab Report: Outside of Finance. Amsterdam: Institute of Network Cultures (INC Reader, 10).

Myers, R. (2019) ‘Three Times Three Modes of Blockchain Art’, Essays, 8 May. Available at: https://rhea.art/three-times-three-modes-of-blockchain-art.

Ostachowski, M.L. (2021) History of Crypto Art. Available at: https://mlo.art/research/history-of-crypto-art/.

Weidinger, A. et al. (eds) (2021) Proof of art: a short history of NFTs, from the beginning of digital art to the metaverse. Berlin: DISTANZ Verlag.

### Hic et Nunc / Teia

Bailey, J. (2021) ‘Hic Et Nunc Brings True Spirit Of Web Art To The Here And Now’, Artnome, 21 March. Available at: https://www.artnome.com/news/2021/3/21/hic-et-nunc-revives-the-true-spirit-of-web-art-through-nfts.

Doe, J. (2022) ‘Hicetnunc screenshots’, Notion, 25 January. Available at: https://hot-flea-a19.notion.site/Hicetnunc-screenshots-8ed49e2ff175413d835600d0dd739ebf.

Drubay, D. (2021) ‘How hic et nunc Brings a New Paradigm Shift in the NFTs and Art Spaces’, Medium, 29 October. Available at: https://dianedrubay.medium.com/how-hic-et-nunc-brings-a-new-paradigm-shift-in-the-blockchain-and-art-spaces-916b34644ce.

Evans, C.L. (2021) ‘Inside Brazil’s DIY, eco-friendly NFT art marketplace’, Rest of World, 17 May. Available at: https://restofworld.org/2021/inside-brazils-diy-nft-art-marketplace/.

Lima, R. (2021) ‘OBJKT Swap’, Medium, 1 March. Available at: https://hicetnunc2000.medium.com/objkt-swap-62dbaf776336.

Mumu the Stan, Koshino, T. and P1xelfool (2021) ‘Building a Global NFT Movement’. Available at: https://tezos.com/events/art-basel/.

Plummer-Fernández, M. (2021) ‘Not another JPEG’, 9 April. Available at: https://www.plummerfernandez.com/works/not-another-jpeg/.

Straeubig, M. (2022) ‘A brief timeline of Hic et Nunc (H=N)’, GitHub. Available at: https://github.com/i3games/hen-timeline.

Teia Community (2022) ‘Teia.art Launch Announcement’, Teia Community Updates & Resources, 1 February. Available at: https://hencommunity.quest/blog/teia-art-launch-announcement.

### Art System / Art Market

Luhmann, N. (2000) Art as a social system. Stanford University Press.

Taylor, G.D. (2014) When the Machine Made Art: The Troubled History of Computer Art. New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.

Thompson, D. (2010) The 12 Million Dollar Stuffed Shark: The Curious Economics of Contemporary Art. London: Aurum Press.

Warburton, N. (2003) The Art Question. London; New York: Routledge.

Wilcox, J. (1953) ‘The Beginnings of l’Art Pour l’Art’, The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 11(4), p. 360. doi:10.2307/426457.

### Art and NFTs - Ethical and Legal issues 

Association of Registrars and Collections Specialists (2021) Code of Ethics and Professional Practices for Collections Professionals. American Alliance of Museums.

Guadamuz, A. (2021) ‘The treachery of images: non-fungible tokens and copyright’, Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice, 16(12), pp. 1367–1385.

### Governance / Community / DAO 

DisCO.coop (2019) If I Only had a Heart: A DisCO Manifesto. DisCO.coop, Transnational Institute and Guerrilla Media Collective.
Kerr, D. and Jennings, M. (2022) A Legal Framework for Decentralized Autonomous Organizations.

### Environmental Impact of Crypto / NFTs

Koomey, J. (2019) Estimating Bitcoin Electricity Use: A Beginner’s Guide. Coin Center. Available at: https://www.coincenter.org/estimating-bitcoin-electricity-use-a-beginners-guide/.

Lemercier, J. (2021) ‘The problem of (Ethereum) CryptoArt’, 17 February. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/the-problem-of-cryptoart/.

Lemercier, J. (2021) ‘The Carbon Drop’, Studio Joanie Lemercier, 22 March. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/the-carbon-drop/.

McDonald, K. (2021) ‘Ethereum Emissions: A Bottom-up Estimate’, arXiv:2112.01238 [cs, math] [Preprint]. Available at: http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01238.

Platt, M. et al. (2021) Energy Footprint of Blockchain Consensus Mechanisms Beyond Proof-of-Work. 7. UCL Centre for Blockchain Technologies. Available at: http://blockchain.cs.ucl.ac.uk/discussion-papers/.

PricewaterhouseCoopers Advisory (2021) Study of the environmental impact of the Tezos blockchain - Life Cycle Assessment of the Tezos blockchain protocol. Available at: https://tezos.com/2021-12-06-Tezos-LCA-Final.pdf.

### Technological Background

Buterin, V. (2013) ‘Ethereum Whitepaper’. Available at: https://ethereum.org/en/whitepaper/.

crcdng (2022) Resources for Developers - Hic et Nunc / Teia / Tezos. Available at: https://github.com/i3games/hen-dev-resources.

Cryptopedia Staff (2022) ‘What Is Proof of Stake (PoS)? PoS Types Examined’, Cryptopedia, 20 January. Available at: https://www.gemini.com/cryptopedia/proof-of-stake-delegated-proof-of-stake-consensus-mechanism.

Entriken, W. et al. (2022) Ethereum Improvement Proposal 721. Available at: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/0fd7ed124cc248b4d3ec62d6202b3a249a7bfe90/EIPS/eip-721.md.

Goodman, L.M. (2014) Tezos — a self-amending crypto-ledger. White paper.

Mishura, E. and Mondet, S. (2020) FA2 - Multi-Asset Interface. TZIP-12. Available at: https://gitlab.com/tezos/tzip/-/blob/master/proposals/tzip-12/tzip-12.md .

Nakamoto, S. (2008) Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system. Available at: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.

Radomski, W. et al. (2022) Ethereum Improvement Proposal 1155. Available at: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/0fd7ed124cc248b4d3ec62d6202b3a249a7bfe90/EIPS/eip-1155.md.

Van Hijfte, S. (2020) Blockchain Platforms: A Look at the Underbelly of Distributed Platforms. Morgan and Claypool.

### Commentary and Critique 

Alice, R. et al. (2022) ‘Can we Build a Better NFT Ecosystem?’ Available at: https://www.rightclicksave.com/article/can-we-build-a-better-nft-ecosystem.

Jisu (2021) ‘Debunking EVERYTHING about The Technology & Ecological-Impact of NFTs/CryptoArt’, Medium, 8 May. Available at: https://jisuartist.medium.com/debunking-everything-about-the-technology-ecological-impact-of-nfts-cryptoart-60ee09bd00ed.

Lemercier, J. (2022) ‘Null and void.’, Studio Joanie Lemercier, 8 January. Available at: https://joanielemercier.com/null-and-void/.

OSINACHI (2022) ‘Have NFTs Lost Their Way?’ Available at: https://www.rightclicksave.com/article/have-nfts-lost-their-way.

The Blockchain Socialist (2021) ‘The best leftist hot take on NFTs you’ll ever listen to (Remix)’, 2 May. Available at: https://theblockchainsocialist.com/unlocked-the-best-leftist-hot-take-on-nfts-youll-ever-listen-to-remix/.

-----------------------

License: CC BY 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
